# Field Soil Description and Soil Classification

## Overview of existing standards

### German Soil Survey Guidelines <img src="../img/two_star.jpg" width="60" valign="bottom" >

!!!
German Soil Survey Guidelines (“Bodenkundliche Kartieranleitung”), 5th edition, Ad-hoc-AG Boden (2005, KA5), short: KA5
!!!

The first edition (1965) was a nation-wide accepted guideline in administration and research. Still in use in some
federal states are also the editions (KA4, 1994 and KA3, 1982). The administrative soil surveys of the federal states (
Bundesländer) often use adaptations and modifications of this guideline. A shortened and simplified version of the
German Soil Survey Guidelines has been extracted from KA5 for soil conservation purposes (Arbeitshilfe Boden; short:
AHB); the Federal Soil Protection and Contaminated Sites Ordinance in Germany refers nonetheless to KA4.

The major part is about describing site, soil profile, layers and horizons, naming horizons and soil’s allocation in the
German soil system (“Bodensystematik”) as well as a classification of the soil material (substrate classification;
”Substratsystematik”). A large number of parameters, often with partly extensive code lists, and a formalized way to
record auxiliary information (form, degree of expression, share, and size) are provided. It is thus one of the most
detailed guidelines for soil description in the world. However, a strict data model is not included.

A new edition is awaited (possibly in 2020) with improvements in the soil system and substrate classification, horizon
notation, code lists and in the mapping part. The simplification of soil description (AHB) shall be included in the new
edition.

### World Reference Base for Soil Resources <img src="../img/two_star.jpg" width="60" valign="bottom" >

!!!
WRB, IUSS Working Group (2014). World reference base for soil resources 2014: International soil classification system
for naming soils and creating legends for soil maps: Update 2015. World Soil Resources Reports No. 106: 203.
!!!

The WRB was developed by a working group with the participation of IUSS, FAO, and ISRIC. It provides a standard
taxonomic soil classification system which allows the accommodation of national systems. It is designed to serve as a
common denominator for communication at the international level and as a correlation between existing classification
systems. The WRB classification system contains two hierarchical levels: On the level of “Reference Soil Group” (RSG) 32
units are differentiated. On the second level the RSG is described more precisely by the use of “Qualifiers”. For every
RSG a list with corresponding principal and supplementary Qualifiers is defined. Classification is done by using both
levels via diagnostic horizons, materials and features.

## Conflicts and solutions (transformation and derivation tools)

### National

The Soil Survey Guidelines in its 5th edition (KA5) is currently the valid basis for soil description in Germany.
However, some administrative soil surveys of the federal states use modifications of these guidelines. Even prior
editions of 1994 (KA4) and 1982 (KA3) are still applied. Harmonization of data acquired according to different editions
of KA can be realized by the use of a transformation tool developed by the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural
Resources BGR (see Chapter 0). DIN 4220 is based on KA5, but deviates in some detail and in particular regarding some
site assessment parameters. DIN 4220 is often applied in the context of geotechnical investigation. KA5 has a more
expanded scope of application and community of users than DIN 4220. Thus, DIN 4220 as a national standard for soil
description in the field has less importance than the German Soil Survey Guidelines.

The substrate classification of soil assessment deviates clearly from that given in the German Soil Survey Guidelines.
Mineral soil types are determined by the fractions of sand, loam and clay. Silt is not represented as a grain fraction,
contrary to other established substrate classification systems, so that comparison with other soil data is difficult.
However, soil assessment data are valuable for various soil scientific issues regarding their high spatial resolution (
scale 1:5000) and comprehensive availability for agricultural area (see Transformation tool for Soil Assessment data,
Chapter 2.3).

The German version of ISO 25177 is not intended to compete with the German Soil Survey Guidelines or with its deducted
standards (e.g. DIN 4220) nor to replace them. It rather should facilitate soil survey work abroad, especially in
Europe. In principle, soil description is feasible according to ISO 25177 also for soils occurring in Germany. But for
most national purposes the application of the German Soil Survey Guidelines is recommended or even mandatory, according
to national law.

### International

There are significant differences between WRB and German soil classification. Main criteria for the latter are type and
vertical order of genetic horizons in soil profiles. In contrast the WRB system uses diagnostic horizons, features and
materials that are described independently from each other. The WRB nomenclature of soil types is based on 32 Reference
Soil Groups (RSG) with principal and supplementary qualifiers. A simple translation of the German soil name into the WRB
name is not feasible for a wide range of soil types due to the deviant approaches. Moreover, WRB uses analytical
parameters for classification, which are either not available for many soil profiles in Germany or are analyzed with
different methods than those intended by WRB.